# Week7 Homework

By Deng Yufan.

## P165 T2

In each of parts (a) to (e) give the lists of invariant factors for all abelian groups of the specified order:

a. order 270. b. 9801. c. 320. d. 105. e. 44100

---

a. $270 = 2 \times 3^3 \times 5$.

30 3 3; 90 3; 270.

b. $9801 = 3^4 \times 11^2$.

33 33 3 3; 99 33 3; 99 99; 297 33; 891 11;

363 3 3 3; 1089 3 3; 1089 9; 3267 3; 9801.

c. $320 = 2^6 \times 5$.

10 2 2 2 2 2; 20 2 2 2 2; 20 4 2 2; 20 4 4; 

40 2 2 2; 40 4 2; 40 8; 80 2 2; 80 4; 160 2; 320.

d. $105 = 3 \times 5 \times 7$.

105.

e. $44100 = 2^2 \times 3^2 \times 5^2 \times 7^2$.

210 210; 420 105; 630 70; 1050 42; 1470 30; 1260 35; 2100 21; 2940 15; 3150 14; 4410 10; 7350 6; 6300 7; 8820 5; 14700 3; 22050 2; 44100.

## P166 T11

Let $G$ be a nontrivial finite abelian group of rank $t$.

a. Prove that the rank of $G$ equals the maximum of the ranks of its Sylow subgroups.

b. Prove that $G$ can be generated by $t$ elements but no subset with fewer than $t$ elements generates $G$.

---

a. If $G$ is in type $(n_1, n_2, \cdots, n_t)$, where $n_t \mid n_{t-1} \mid \cdots \mid n_1$, then Sylow-p subgroup is in type $(n_1', n_2', \cdots, n_{t'}')$, where $n_i' = p^k \mid n_i \space (\max k)$, and we omit 1's in the end of $\{n_i'\}$. If $t' < t$ for all $p$, then we can see $n_t = 1$, which contradict to $n_t$ is in type of $G$. So there must be a $t' = t$. And obviously $t' \le t$, so $\text{rank}(G) = \max_{H \in Syl_p(G)} \text{rank}(H)$.

b. Obviously $(1, 0, \cdots, 0), (0, 1, \cdots, 0), \cdots, (0, 0, \cdots, 1)$ can generate $G$. If there is $H = \{\vec {h_1}, \vec {h_2}, \cdots, \vec {h_{t-1}}\}$ and $\langle H \rangle = G$, write $H$ as a $t \times (t-1)$ matrix, then we have $x_1, \cdots, x_t \in Z^{t-1}$ that $Hx_i = e_i$. So $\text{rank}(L_H) = t$, but $L_H : Z^{t-1} \to Z^t$, contradiction.

## P167 T14

For any group $G$ define the dual group of $G$ (denoted $\hat G$) to be the set of all homomorphisms from $G$ into the multiplicative group of roots of unity in $\Complex$, $(\{x \in \Complex \mid |x| = 1\}, \times)$. Define a group operation in $\hat G$ by pointwise multiplication of functions: if $\chi$, $\psi$ are homomorphisms from $G$ into the group of roots of unity then $\chi \psi$ is the homomorphism given by $(\chi \psi)(g) = \chi(g) \psi(g)$ for all $g \in G$, where the latter multiplication takes place in $C$.

a. Show that this operation on $\hat G$ makes $\hat G$ into an abelian group.

b. If $G$ is a finite abelian group, prove that $\hat G \cong G$.

---

a. Closure: $(\chi \psi)(x) (\chi \psi)(y) = \chi(x) \psi(x) \chi(y) \psi(y) = \chi(x) \chi(y) \psi(x) \psi(y) = \chi(xy) \psi(xy) = (\chi \psi)(xy)$.

Identity: $1(g) = 1$.

Inverse: $(\chi^{-1})(g) = \chi(g)^{-1}$.

Assoc: $[(\chi \psi) \eta](g) = \chi(g) \psi(g) \eta(g) = [\chi (\psi \eta)](g)$.

Comm: $(\chi \psi)(g) = \chi(g) \psi(g) = \psi(g) \chi(g) = (\psi \chi)(g)$.

b. If $G$ is in type $(n_1, n_2, \cdots, n_t)$, where $n_t \mid n_{t-1} \mid \cdots \mid n_1$, then we have $G = \langle x_1 \rangle \times \cdots \times \langle x_t \rangle$, $|x_i| = n_i$. Consider $\chi_i$ that $\chi_i(x_i) = e^{2\pi i / n_i}$ and $\chi_i(x_j) = 1$ for $j \ne i$. Obviously $|\chi_i| = n_i$. For all $\chi \in \hat G$, we have $\chi(x_i)^{n_i} = 1$, so $\chi(x_i) = (e^{2\pi i / n_i})^k$, thus can be generated by $\{\chi_i\}$. So $\hat G \cong \langle \chi_1 \rangle \times \cdots \times \langle \chi_t \rangle \cong G$.

## P173 T3

Let $a, b, c \in G$. Prove that

a. $[a, bc] = [a, c](c^{-1}[a, b]c)$.

b. $[ab, c] = (b^{-1}[a, c]b)[b, c]$.

---

a. $[a, c](c^{-1}[a, b]c) = (a^{-1}c^{-1}ac)c^{-1}(a^{-1}b^{-1}ab)c = a^{-1}(c^{-1}b^{-1})a(bc) = [a, bc]$.

b. $(b^{-1}[a, c]b)[b, c] = b^{-1}(a^{-1}c^{-1}ac)b(b^{-1}c^{-1}bc) = (b^{-1}a^{-1})c^{-1}(ab)c = [ab, c]$.

## P174 T8

Assume $x, y \in G$ and both $x$ and $y$ commute with $[x, y]$. Prove that for all $n \in Z^+$, $(xy)^n = x^ny^n[y, x]^\frac{n(n-1)}{2}$.

---

Induction $n$ to prove $y^n x = xy^n [y, x]^n$. $n=1$ is obvious. Assume $n$ and prove $n+1$.

We have $y^{n+1}x = yy^nx = yxy^n[y, x]^n = xy[y, x]y^n [y, x]^n = xyy^n [y, x][y, x]^n = xy^{n+1}[y, x]^{n+1}$.

Induction $n$ to prove the thm. $n=1$ is obvious. Assume $n$ and prove $n+1$.

We have $(xy)^{n+1} = (xy)^n xy = x^ny^n[y, x]^\frac{n(n-1)}{2} xy = x^ny^n xy [y, x]^\frac{n(n-1)}{2} = x^nxy^ny[y, x]^n[y, x]^\frac{n(n-1)}{2} = x^{n+1}y^{n+1}[y, x]^\frac{(n+1)n}{2}$.

## P174 T16

Prove that if $K$ is a normal subgroup of $G$ then $K' \unlhd G$.

---

We have $K' = \langle S \rangle = \langle x^{-1}y^{-1}xy \mid x, y \in K \rangle$. For all $x, y \in K$, we have $g(x^{-1}y^{-1}xy)g^{-1} = (gxg^{-1})^{-1}(gyg^{-1})^{-1}(gxg^{-1})(gyg^{-1}) \in S$ since $K \unlhd G$. So $gSg^{-1} = S$. Since $g\langle S \rangle g^{-1} = \langle gSg^{-1} \rangle = \langle S \rangle$, $K' = \langle S \rangle \unlhd G$.

## P184 T1

Let $H$ and $K$ be groups, let $\phi$ be a homomorphism from $K$ into $\text{Aut}(H)$ and identify $H$ and $K$ as subgroups of $G = H \rtimes_\phi K$.

Prove that $C_K(H) = \ker \phi$.

---

We have $(1, k) (h, 1) (1, k)^{-1} = (k \cdot h, k)(1, k^{-1}) = (k \cdot h, 1)$, so $(1, k) (h, 1) (1, k)^{-1} = (h, 1)$ iff $k \cdot h = h$ iff $k \in \ker \phi$.

## P184 T5

Let $G = \text{Hol}(Z_2 \times Z_2)$. Where $\text{Hol}(G) = G \rtimes \text{Aut}(G)$.

a. Prove that $G = H \rtimes K$ where $H = Z_2 \times Z_2$ and $K \cong S_3$. Deduce that $|G|=24$.

b. Prove that $G$ is isomorphic to $S_4$.

---

a. Obviously $Z_2 \times Z_2 \cong V_4$. Obviously $H = Z_2 \times Z_2$. We prove $\text{Aut}(V_4) \cong S_3$.

For all $\phi \in \text{Aut}(V_4)$, we have $\phi(1) = 1$. Since whatever $\phi(a), \phi(b), \phi(c)$ is, if the three value are different from each other, $\phi$ is valid, thus $\text{Aut}(V_4) \cong S_3$ since every auto. can biject to element in $S_{a, b, c}$.

Thus $|G| = |H| \times |K| = 24$.

b. We need prove $V_4 \rtimes S_3 \cong S_4$. Obviously $G_1 = \{e, (1, 2)(3, 4), (1, 3)(2, 4), (1, 4)(2, 3)\} \cong \{1, a, b, c\}$; $S_3$ iso. to all perm. in $S_4$ that hold element 4 unchange, namely $G_2$. Obviously $G_1 \cap G_2 = \{e\}$, $G_1 \unlhd S_4$, then $S_4 \cong G_1G_2 \cong G_1 \rtimes G_2$, where the group action is conjugate.

## P185 T10

This exercise classifies the groups of order 147 (there are six isomorphism types).

a. Prove that there are two abelian groups of order 147.

b. Prove that every group of order 147 has a normal Sylow 7-subgroup.

c. Prove that there is a unique non-abelian group whose Sylow 7-subgroup is cyclic.

d. Let $t_1 = \left[\begin{matrix}2 & 0 \\ 0 & 1\end{matrix}\right]$ and $t_2 = \left[\begin{matrix}1 & 0 \\ 0 & 2\end{matrix}\right]$ be elements of $GL_2(F_7)$. Prove $P = \langle t_1, t_2 \rangle$ is a Sylow 3-subgroup of $GL_2(F_7)$ and that $P \cong Z_3 \times Z_3$. Deduce that every subgroup of $GL_2(F_7)$ of order 3 is conjugate in $GL_2(F_7)$ to a subgroup of $P$.

e. By Example 3 in Section 1 the group $P$ has four subgroups of order 3 and these are: $P_1 = \langle t_1 \rangle$, $P_2 = \langle t_2 \rangle$, $P_3 = \langle t_1t_2 \rangle$, and $P_4 = \langle t_1t_2^2 \rangle$. For $i = 1, 2, 3, 4$ let $G_i = (Z_7 \times Z_7) \rtimes_{\phi_i} Z_3$, where $\phi_i$ is an isomorphism of $Z_3$ with the subgroup $P_i$ of $\text{Aut}(Z_7 \times Z_7)$. For each $i$ describe $G_i$ in terms of generators and relations. Deduce that $G_1 \cong G_2$.

f. Prove that $G_1$ is not isomorphic to either $G_3$ or $G_4$.

g. Prove that $G_3$ is not isomorphic to $G_4$.

h. Classify the groups of order 147 by showing that the six nonisomorphic groups described above (two from part (a), one from part (c) and $G_1$, $G_3$, and $G_4$) are all the groups of order 147. (The classification of groups of order $pq^2$, where $p$ and $q$ are primes with $p < q$ and $p \mid q - 1$, is quite similar.)

---

a. We have $147 = 3 \times 7^2$, so invariant factors can be 21 7 or 147. Thus exactly 2 Abelian groups.

b. Since $n_7 \equiv 1 \pmod 7$ and $n_7 \mid 3$, we have $n_7 = 1$. We have $n_7 = 1$ iff the 7-Sylow subgroup is normal.

c. Suppose $H = \langle x \rangle \unlhd G$ and $|x| = 49$. We have $G / H \cong Z_3$ since $|G|/|H| = 3$. Let $G/H = \{1H, yH, y^2H\}$ where $y \in G$. Then we have $y \notin H$, $y^2 \notin H$, and $G = H \cup yH \cup y^2H$.

Let $G_a = \langle x, y \mid |x|=49, |y|=3, yx=x^ay \rangle$. Suppose $G_a = \{y^px^q \mid 0 \le p < 3, 0 \le q < 49\}$. We have $x = y^3x$, that is $x = x^{a^3}$, $a^3 \equiv 1 \pmod{49}$. Thus $a$ can only be $1, 18, 30$. When $a=1$, $G$ is Abelian. So $a$ can only be $18$ and $30$.

Since $18^2 \equiv 30 \pmod{49}$, $30^2 \equiv 18 \pmod{49}$, we can let $\phi(x) = x$, $\phi(y) = y^2$ to be a iso. between $G_{18}$ and $G_{30}$. So only unique non-Abelian group.

d. Obviously $t_1$ and $t_2$ is invertible. By writing program we found $|GL_2(F_7)| = 2016$. So Sylow-3 subgroup is in order 9. We have $2^3 \equiv 1$, so $\phi(t_1) = (1, 0)$, $\phi(t_2) = (0, 1)$ is iso. from $\langle t_1, t_2 \rangle$ to $Z_3 \times Z_3$. Thus $|\langle t_1, t_2 \rangle| = 9$ is a Sylow-3 subgroup.

e. $G_1 = \langle ((1, 0), 0), ((0, 1), 0), ((0, 0), 1) \rangle = \langle a, b, c \mid a^7=b^7=1, c^3=1, ab=ba, ca=a^2c, cb=bc \rangle$.

$G_2 = \langle ((1, 0), 0), ((0, 1), 0), ((0, 0), 1) \rangle = \langle a, b, c \mid a^7=b^7=1, c^3=1, ab=ba, ca=ac, cb=b^2c \rangle$.

$G_3 = \langle ((1, 0), 0), ((0, 1), 0), ((0, 0), 1) \rangle = \langle a, b, c \mid a^7=b^7=1, c^3=1, ab=ba, ca=a^2c, cb=b^2c \rangle$.

$G_4 = \langle ((1, 0), 0), ((0, 1), 0), ((0, 0), 1) \rangle = \langle a, b, c \mid a^7=b^7=1, c^3=1, ab=ba, ca=a^2c, cb=b^4c \rangle$.

Obviously $\phi(a) = b$, $\phi(b) = a$, $\phi(c) = c$ is iso. between $G_1$ and $G_2$.

f. Easy to see $b \in Z(G_1)$, since $b(a^ib^jc^k) = a^ib^{j+1}c^k$ and $(a^ib^jc^k)b = a^ib^{j+1}c^k$.

For all $a^ib^jc^k \in G_3$, if $c(a^ib^jc^k) = a^ib^jc^{k+1}$, we have $a^{2i}b^{2j}c^{k+1} = a^ib^jc^{k+1}$, thus $i=j=0$. But $c$ is not commute with $a$, so $Z(G_3) = 1$. Thus $G_1 \not \cong G_3$.

Likewise, $Z(G_4) = 1$, thus $G_1 \not \cong G_4$.

g. For all $H \le G_3$ or $H \le G_4$ and $|H| = 7$, we have $H = \langle a^pb^q \rangle$ since 7 is prime and $|c| = 3$ and $3 \nmid 7$.

For all $a^ib^jc^k \in G_3$, we have $(a^ib^jc^k)(a^pb^q)(a^ib^jc^k)^{-1} = a^ib^jc^ka^pb^qc^{-k}b^{-j}a^{-i} = a^{2p}b^{2q} \in H$, so $H \unlhd G_3$.

But consider $H = \langle ab \rangle$, for all $a^ib^jc^k \in G_4$, we have $(a^ib^jc^k)(ab)(a^ib^jc^k)^{-1} = a^ib^jc^kabc^{-k}b^{-j}a^{-i} = a^2b^4 \notin H$, and $|H| = 7$. Thus $G_3 \not \cong G_4$.

h. If $G$ is Abelian, then $G = Z_{21} \times Z_7$ or $G = Z_{147}$.

Otherwise $G$ is non-Abelian. If the unique Sylow-7 subgroup of $G$ is cyclic, then $G = \langle x, y \mid |x|=49, |y|=3, yx=x^{18}y \rangle$.

Otherwise the unique Sylow-7 subgroup of $G$ is not cyclic, thus the subgroup $\cong Z_7 \times Z_7$. Obviously $\text{Aut}(Z_7 \times Z_7) \cong GL_2(F_7)$, and all 3-order subgroup of $GL_2(F_7)$ is conjugate to subgroup of $\langle t_1, t_2 \rangle$; and $t_1$, $t_2$ is diagonal, thus commute with all matrix in $GL_2(F_7)$, so all 3-order subgroup of $GL_2(F_7)$ is subgroup of $\langle t_1, t_2 \rangle$.

Since the Sylow-7 subgroup is normal in $G$, and the Sylow-7 subgroup intersect with any Sylow-3 subgroup is trivial (otherwise we found $x \ne 1$ and $|x| = 1$), $G$ can be represent as $H \rtimes K$, where $H$ is the Sylow-7 subgroup. After considering every 3-order subgroup of $\langle t_1, t_2 \rangle$ semi-product with $Z_7 \times Z_7$, we have $G = \langle a, b, c \mid a^7=b^7=1, c^3=1, ab=ba, ca=a^2c, cb=bc \rangle$, $G = \langle a, b, c \mid a^7=b^7=1, c^3=1, ab=ba, ca=a^2c, cb=b^2c \rangle$, or $G = \langle a, b, c \mid a^7=b^7=1, c^3=1, ab=ba, ca=a^2c, cb=b^4c \rangle$.
